A thermistor is a resistance thermometer, or a resistor whose resistance is dependent on temperature. The term is a combination of “thermal” and “resistor”. It is made of metallic oxides, pressed into a bead, disk, or cylindrical shape and then encapsulated with an impermeable material such as epoxy or glass.

There are two types of thermistors: Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) and Positive Temperature Coefficient (PTC). With an NTC thermistor, when the temperature increases, resistance decreases. Conversely, when temperature decreases, resistance increases. This type of thermistor is used the most.

A PTC thermistor works a little differently. When temperature increases, the resistance increases, and when temperature decreases, resistance decreases. This type of thermistor is generally used as a fuse.

Typically, a thermistor achieves high precision within a limited temperature range of about 50ºC around the target temperature. This range is dependent on the base resistance.

Some of the most common uses of thermistors are in digital thermometers, in cars to measure oil and coolant temperatures, and in household appliances such as ovens and refrigerators, but they are also found in almost any application that requires heating or cooling protection circuits for safe operation. For more sophisticated applications, such as laser stabilization detectors, optical blocks, and charge coupled devices, the thermistor is built in. For example, a 10 kΩ thermistor is the standard that is built into laser packages.

A thermistor does not actually “read” anything, instead the resistance of a thermistor changes with temperature. How much the resistance changes depends on the type of material used in the thermistor.

Unlike other sensors, thermistors are nonlinear, meaning the points on a graph representing the relationship between resistance and temperature will not form a straight line. The location of the line and how much it changes is determined by the construction of the thermistor. A typical thermistor graph looks like this:

A thermistor is a semiconductor type of resistor whose resistance is strongly dependent on temperature, more so than in standard resistors. The word thermistor is a portmanteau of thermal and resistor.

Thermistors are divided based on their conduction model. Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) thermistors have less resistance at higher temperatures, while Positive Temperature Coefficient (PTC) thermistors have more resistance at higher temperatures.[1]

NTC thermistor are widely used as inrush current limiters, temperature sensors, while PTC thermistors are used as self-resetting overcurrent protectors, and self-regulating heating elements. An operational temperature range of a thermistor is dependent on the probe type and is typically between −100 °C and 300 °C (−148 °F and 572 °F). 

Assuming, as a first-order approximation, that the relationship between resistance and temperature is linear, then

    Δ R = k Δ T , {\displaystyle \Delta R=k\,\Delta T,}

where

    Δ R \Delta R, change in resistance,
    Δ T \Delta T, change in temperature,
    k k, first-order temperature coefficient of resistance.

Depending on type of the thermistor in question the k k may be either positive or negative.

If k k is positive, the resistance increases with increasing temperature, and the device is called a positive temperature coefficient (PTC) thermistor, or posistor, there are two types of PTCr, switching thermistor and silistor. If k k is negative, the resistance decreases with increasing temperature, and the device is called a negative temperature coefficient (NTC) thermistor. Resistors that are not thermistors are designed to have a k k as close to 0 as possible, so that their resistance remains nearly constant over a wide temperature range.

Instead of the temperature coefficient k, sometimes the temperature coefficient of resistance α T \alpha _{T} ("alpha sub T") is used. It is defined as[6]

    α T = 1 R ( T ) d R d T . \alpha _{T}={\frac {1}{R(T)}}{\frac {dR}{dT}}.

This α T \alpha _{T} coefficient should not be confused with the a a parameter below


What is a Thermistor

A thermistor is a thermally sensitive resistor that exhibits a precise and predictable change in resistance proportional to small changes in body temperature. How much its resistance will change is dependent upon its unique composition. Thermistors are part of a larger group of passive components. And unlike their active component counterparts, passive devices are incapable of providing power gain, or amplification to a circuit.

Thermistor Types

There are two types of thermistors. NTC or Negative Temperature Coefficient thermistors, and PTC or Positive Temperature Coefficient thermistors. The difference is that NTC thermistors exhibit a DECREASE in resistance as body temperature increases, while PTC thermistors exhibit an INCREASE in resistance as body temperature increases.


